Title: Renal Boundary and Tumour Detection in MRI using U-Net with Transfer Learning

Although contrast enhanced computed tomography (CECT) is the clinical mainstay for renal mass evaluation, multiparametric MRI use is increasing due to a potential improved ability to differentiate benign from malignant renal masses and assess the aggressiveness of malignant tumours. U-Net models are effective at renal mass segmentation tasks in CECT, however their use in the MRI modality is not well studied. In this work, U-Net models for kidney and renal mass segmentation in MRIs are developed in support of an autonomous renal tumour detection algorithm.

Our dataset consists of 118 contrast-enhanced nephrographic phase MRIs (NG-MRI) with a total of 217 renal masses. The volumetric data includes manual kidney segmentations and renal mass segmentations, performed by an abdominal radiologist. We performed kidney segmentation on 2D axial slices of NG-MRIs using an Attention U-Net. The Attention U-Net model used has a depth of 5 encoder blocks and a kernel size of 3x3, resulting in 7,863,358 model parameters trained using a loss function that combines Dice loss with binary cross-entropy (BCE). A renal mass segmentation model that operates within localized kidney boundaries is also developed and tested based on 5-fold cross validation using the manual kidney segmentation boundaries as a localizer to establish an upper-bound on performance. Both segmentation models are pre-trained on a dataset of 299 CECT images with radiologist-provided kidney and renal mass segmentations. Full network adaption transfer learning is then used to train and test the models on the full NG-MRI dataset using 5-fold cross validation. In the case of renal mass segmentation, an asymmetric loss function based on the Tversky Index combined with BCE loss was used to improve the clinical relevance of results by increasing the lesion segmentation recall score. To determine renal mass detection accuracy, unique 3D masses within predictions were found using a Laplacian of Gaussian blob detector and compared to the ground truth using voxel overlap.

The kidney segmentation algorithm reported a Dice Similarity Coefficient (DSC) of 93% ± 2.8% (mean ± SD) on a test set of 12 NG-MRI volumes. Using a model that combines transfer learning from CECT images and an asymmetric loss function, a precision and recall score of 54% and 58% respectively was found on the tumour semantic segmentation task. On a mass-wise basis, the precision and recall for detection was found to be 71.3% and 70.3% respectively.

Publication Status of the Work: Unpublished (i.e., new work)

Link to Full Paper (if available): 

