Title: Deep Learning-Based Segmentation of Neonatal Cerebral Lateral Ventricles from 3D Ultrasound Images

In comparison to two-dimensional (2D) ultrasound (US), three-dimensional (3D) US imaging is a more sensitive alternative for monitoring the size and shape of neonatal cerebral lateral ventricles. It can be used to monitor posthemorrhagic ventricular dilatation (PHVD) caused by intraventricular hemorrhaging (IVH), which is bleeding inside the lateral ventricles of neonates. Tracking ventricular dilatation is important as it can cause increased intracranial pressure, leading to neurological damage. However, manually segmenting 3D US images is time-consuming (up to 45 minutes per patient) and tedious due to poor image contrast of 3D US and the complex shape of cerebral ventricles. In this paper, we describe an automated segmentation method based on a U-Net ensemble for the segmentation of 3D US images that may contain one or both ventricle(s). The ensemble is made from combining three U-Net variant models through a mean voting strategy where each individual model highlights specific aspects of the ventricles. The three variants are a U-Net++, Attention U-Net and a U-Net with an autoencoder shape prior. We trained and tested the ensemble on two separate subsets of the dataset (one ventricle only data and two ventricle only data). Of the 190 images used, 103 images contained only one ventricle and the other 87 contained both ventricles. To mitigate the class imbalance of the object vs. background, we augmented the images through reflection about the plane of symmetry. In addition, due to the lack of available annotated data, 5-fold cross-validation was implemented. As a benchmark comparison, we also trained each standalone model, a vanilla 3D U-Net and a 2D multiplane U-Net to prove the benefits from our proposed ensemble. The developed ensemble model reported a Dice similarity coefficient (DSC) of 0.746±0.088, absolute volumetric difference (VD) of 2.8±2.5cm^3 and a mean absolute surface distance (MAD) of 0.89±0.30mm on 75 two ventricle test images using cross-validation. Using 90 one ventricle test images, the model after cross-validation reported DSC, VD and MAD values of 0.820±0.102, 4.3±4.3cm^3 and 1.37±1.64mm respectively. The proposed ensemble performed best on both data subsets compared to every model tested and it performed faster than the current best non-deep learning methods with approximately 5 seconds to fully segment and post-process one image.

Publication Status of the Work: Unpublished (i.e., new work)

Link to Full Paper (if available): 

